tests/readme.md, before:

### Tests functions

#### add hybridization

tests_5taxon.jl runs all the tests for the eight 5taxon networks of
starting with tree_example.jl and adding one hybridization

It calls add_hybrid_caseC,D,E,F,G,H,I,J.jl

aux functions: print_add.jl and test_functions_5taxon.jl

#### delete hybridization

tests_5taxon_delete.jl runs all the tests for the eight 5taxon
networks of starting with tree_example.jl and adding one
hybridization, and then deleting it and comparing to the original tree
example

It calls delete_hybrid_caseC,D,E,F,G,H,I,J.jl

aux functions: test_functions_5taxon.jl

#### read topology

test_5taxon_readTopology.jl runs all the tests for the eight 5taxon
networks by reading from parenthetical format and then updating

aux functions: test_functions_5taxon_read.jl

#### calculate exp CF

test_calculateExpCF.jl runs all the tests for Case G, bad diamond and
bad triangle for calculation of expCF

#### has Edge

test_hasEdge.jl tests if the attribute qnet.hasEdge is correctly
updated after extracting quartets for case G

#### not automatic functions:

test_extractQuartet.jl

initial_tests_deleteLeaf_quartetNet.jl

Commit message:

moved optBL and its parts to functions.jl; work on testOptBLparts, it works; modified updateHasEdges because qnet.hasEdge was wrong, it needs to have the same length as x and qnet.ht; modified testHasEdge accordingly; modified update(qnet,x,net) to update 1-gamma as well; created function to write df with expCF from a quartet array and function to read a dataframe and create the DataCf object; changed Quartet type to use approxEq to check sum(obsCF)=1; copied needed modules into functions.jl; created testOptBL but not working yet, optimization stuck in starting point; changed optimize(opt,ht) instead of net.ht because it seems to be linked

tests/readme.md, after:

### Tests functions

#### add hybridization

tests_5taxon.jl runs all the tests for the eight 5taxon networks of
starting with tree_example.jl and adding one hybridization

It calls add_hybrid_caseC,D,E,F,G,H,I,J.jl

aux functions: print_add.jl and test_functions_5taxon.jl

#### delete hybridization

tests_5taxon_delete.jl runs all the tests for the eight 5taxon
networks of starting with tree_example.jl and adding one
hybridization, and then deleting it and comparing to the original tree
example

It calls delete_hybrid_caseC,D,E,F,G,H,I,J.jl

aux functions: test_functions_5taxon.jl

#### read topology

test_5taxon_readTopology.jl runs all the tests for the eight 5taxon
networks by reading from parenthetical format and then updating

aux functions: test_functions_5taxon_read.jl

#### calculate exp CF

test_calculateExpCF.jl runs all the tests for Case G, bad diamond and
bad triangle for calculation of expCF

#### has Edge

test_hasEdge.jl tests if the attribute qnet.hasEdge is correctly
updated after extracting quartets for case G. It also checks if
net.ht, net.numht, qnet.indexht are correctly set for Case G.

#### parts of optBL

test_optBLparts.jl tests the parts of optBL separately to see if they
work.


#### not automatic functions:

test_extractQuartet.jl

initial_tests_deleteLeaf_quartetNet.jl
