docs/src/man/dist_reroot.md, before:

```@setup dist_reroot
using PhyloNetworks
mkpath("../assets/figures")
raxmltrees = joinpath(dirname(pathof(PhyloNetworks)), "..","examples","raxmltrees.tre")
raxmlCF = readTableCF(writeTableCF(countquartetsintrees(readMultiTopology(raxmltrees), showprogressbar=false)...))
astralfile = joinpath(dirname(pathof(PhyloNetworks)), "..","examples","astral.tre")
astraltree = readMultiTopology(astralfile)[102] # 102th tree = last tree here
net0 = readTopology(joinpath(dirname(pathof(PhyloNetworks)), "..","examples","net0.out"))
net1 = readTopology(joinpath(dirname(pathof(PhyloNetworks)), "..","examples","net1.out"))
net0.loglik = 53.53150526187732
net1.loglik = 28.31506721890958
```
# Comparing and manipulating networks

Examples below follow those in [Getting a Network](@ref).

## Comparing networks / trees

Is the SNaQ tree (network with h=0) the same as the ASTRAL tree?
We can calculate their Robinson-Foulds distance:

```@repl dist_reroot
hardwiredClusterDistance(astraltree, net0, false)
```
The last option `false` is to consider topologies as unrooted.
The RF distance is 0, so the two unrooted topologies are the same.
If we had considered them as rooted, with whatever root they
currently have in their internal representation,
we would find a difference:
```@repl dist_reroot
hardwiredClusterDistance(astraltree, net0, true)
```

## Re-rooting trees and networks

We can re-root our networks with the outgroup, O,
and then re-compare the ASTRAL tree and the SNaQ tree
as rooted topologies (and find no difference):
```@repl dist_reroot
rootatnode!(astraltree, "O")
rootatnode!(net0, "O")
hardwiredClusterDistance(astraltree, net0, true)
```
```@example dist_reroot
using PhyloPlots, RCall
R"name <- function(x) file.path('..', 'assets', 'figures', x)"
R"svg(name('net0_O.svg'), width=4, height=4)"
R"par"(mar=[0,0,0,0])
plot(net0);
R"dev.off()"
nothing # hide
```
![net0_O](../assets/figures/net0_O.svg)

Note that, as in previous chapters, we use the possibilities of `RCall`
to save the plot. We only show this commands once, but they will be run
behind the scene each time a plot is called.

After trees/networks are rooted with a correct outgroup,
their visualization is more meaningful.

Networks can be re-rooted at a given node or along a given edge.
Get help (type `?`) on the functions `rootatnode!` and `rootonedge!`
for more info. There are examples in the [Network support](@ref) section.

If the network is plotted with crossing edges, you may identify
ways to rotate the children edges at some nodes to untangle some crossing edges.
This can be done using the function `rotate!`.
See an example in the [Network support](@ref) section, or type `?` then `rotate!`.

## What if the root conflicts with the direction of a reticulation?

With 1 hybridization or more, the direction of hybrid edges
constrain the position of the root. The root cannot be downstream of hybrid edges.
Any hybrid node has to be younger than, or of the same age as both of its parents.
So time has to flow "downwards" of any hybrid node, and the root cannot be
placed "below" a hybrid node.
An attempt to re-root the network at a position incompatible with hybrid edges
will fail, with a `RootMismatch` error. To show an example, let's use the
network below. We plotted the edge numbers, because we will want to use them
later to place the root.

```@example dist_reroot
net7taxa = readTopology("(C,D,((O,(E,#H7:::0.196):0.314):0.664,(((A1,A2))#H7:::0.804,B):10.0):10.0);")
R"svg(name('reroot_net7taxa_1.svg'), width=4, height=4)" # hide
R"par"(mar=[0,0,0,0]) # hide
plot(net7taxa, showgamma=true, showedgenumber=true, tipoffset=0.2);
R"dev.off()"; # hide
nothing # hide
```
![reroot net7taxa 1](../assets/figures/reroot_net7taxa_1.svg)

Let's imagine that the A1 and A2 are our outgroups, and we estimated the network above.
According to this network, time must flow from the hybrid node towards A1 and A2.
So any attempt to reroot the network with A1 as outgroup, or with A2 as outgroup,
or with the A clade (on edge 11), will fail with a `RootMismatch` error:

```julia
rootatnode!(net7taxa, "A1"); # ERROR: RootMismatch: non-leaf node 5 had 0 children. ...
rootatnode!(net7taxa, "A2"); # ERROR: RootMismatch (again)
rootonedge!(net7taxa, 10);   # ERROR: RootMismatch (again)
```

In this case, however, it is possible to root the network on either parent edge
of the hybrid node. These edges have numbers 12 and 5, based on the plot above.
We get these 2 rooted versions of the network:

```@example dist_reroot
R"svg(name('reroot_net7taxa_2.svg'), width=7, height=4)"; # hide
R"layout(matrix(1:2,1,2))";
R"par"(mar=[0,0,0.5,0]); # hide
rootonedge!(net7taxa, 11);
rotate!(net7taxa, -5)
plot(net7taxa, showgamma=true, tipoffset=0.2, shownodenumber=true);
R"mtext"("rooted on hybrid edge 11 (major)", line=-1)
rootonedge!(net7taxa, 5);
plot(net7taxa, showgamma=true, tipoffset=0.2);
R"mtext"("rooted on hybrid edge 5 (minor)", line=-1);
R"dev.off()"; # hide
nothing # hide
```
![reroot net7taxa 2](../assets/figures/reroot_net7taxa_2.svg)

On the second plot, the A clade does not *appear* to be an outgroup,
but this is just because the plot follows the major tree primarily,
based the major hybrid edges (those with γ>0.5).
We can display the exact same network differently, by changing
the γ inheritance values to invert the major/minor consideration of the hybrid edges.
```@example dist_reroot
net7taxa.edge[5] # just to check that it's one of the 2 hybrid edges of interest
setGamma!(net7taxa.edge[5], 0.501) # switch major/minor edges
R"svg(name('reroot_net7taxa_3.svg'), width=4, height=4)"; # hide
R"layout(matrix(1,1,1))"; # hide
R"par"(mar=[0,0,0,0]); # hide
plot(net7taxa, tipoffset=0.2); # not showing gamma values, because we changed them artificially
R"mtext"("rooted on hybrid edge 5 (considered major)", line=-1);
R"dev.off()"; # hide
nothing # hide
```
![reroot net7taxa 3](../assets/figures/reroot_net7taxa_3.svg)

Conclusion, in this particular example: it is possible to re-root the network to a place
where the A clade is indeed an outgroup. But it did require some care,
and we discovered that there are 2 acceptable rooting options.
The first is more plausible, if we think that the *species tree* is the *major tree*,
meaning that any gene flow or introgression event replaced less than 50% of the genes
in the recipient population.

In other cases, it may not be possible to re-root the network with a known outgroup.
It would be the case if A1 was the only outgroup, and if A2 was an ingroup taxon.
In such a case, the outgroup knowledge tells us that our estimated network is wrong.
One (or more) reticulation in the network must be incorrect.
Its placement might be correct, but then its direction would be incorrect.
If the network was estimated via `snaq!`, check tips
about [Candidate networks compatible with a known outgroup](@ref).

## Extracting the major tree

We can also compare the networks estimated with h=0 (net0) and h=1 (net1):
```@repl dist_reroot
rootatnode!(net1, "O"); # the ; suppresses screen output
hardwiredClusterDistance(net0, net1, true)
```
```@example dist_reroot
R"svg(name('net1_O.svg'), width=4, height=4)" # hide
R"par"(mar=[0,0,0,0]) # hide
plot(net1, showgamma=true);
R"dev.off()" # hide
nothing # hide
```
![net1_O](../assets/figures/net1_O.svg)

They differ by 2 clusters: that's because A is of hybrid descent
in net1, not in net0.

To beyond this hybrid difference,
we can extract the major tree from the network with 1 hybridization,
that is, delete the hybrid edge supported by less than 50% of genes.
Then we can compare this tree with the ASTRAL/SNaQ tree net0.
```@repl dist_reroot
tree1 = majorTree(net1); # major tree from net1
hardwiredClusterDistance(net0, tree1, true)
```
They are identical (at distance 0), so here the species network
with 1 hybrid node is a refinement of the estimated species tree
(this needs not be the case always).

Is the SNaQ network with 1 hybrid node the same as the true network,
the one that was initially used to simulate the data?

(digression on the data: gene trees were simulated under the coalescent
along some "true" network, then 500 base-pair alignments were simulated
along each gene tree with the HKY model,
gene trees were estimated from each alignment with RAxML, and
these estimated gene trees served as input to both ASTRAL and SNaQ.)

The true network is shown below, correctly rooted at the outgroup O,
and plotted with branch lengths proportional to their
values in coalescence units:
```@repl dist_reroot
truenet = readTopology("((((D:0.4,C:0.4):4.8,((A:0.8,B:0.8):2.2)#H1:2.2::0.7):4.0,(#H1:0::0.3,E:3.0):6.2):2.0,O:11.2);");
hardwiredClusterDistance(net1, truenet, true)
```
```@example dist_reroot
R"svg(name('truenet_sim.svg'), width=4, height=4)" # hide
R"par"(mar=[0,0,0,0]) # hide
plot(truenet, useedgelength=true, showgamma=true);
R"dev.off()" # hide
nothing # hide
```
![truenet](../assets/figures/truenet_sim.svg)

Our estimated network is not the same as the true network:
- the underlying tree is correctly estimated
- the origin of gene flow is correctly estimated: E
- the target of gene flow is *not* correctly estimated: it was
  the lineage ancestral to (A,B), but it is estimated to be A only.

For networks, the distance here is the hardwired cluster distance:
the number of hardwired clusters found in one network and not
in the other. The **hardwired cluster** associated with an edge is the
set of *all* tips descendant from that edge, i.e. all tips that
inherited at least *some* genetic material from that edge.

## Displayed trees and subnetworks

We can extract all trees displayed in a network.
These trees are obtained by picking one parent hybrid edge
at each hybrid node, and dropping the other parent hybrid edge.
We can choose to pick the "important" hybrid edges only,
with heritability γ at or above a threshold.
Below we use a γ threshold of 0, so we get all displayed trees:
```@repl dist_reroot
t = displayedTrees(net1, 0.0) # list of trees displayed in network
writeTopology(t[1], round=true)
writeTopology(t[2], round=true)
```
If we decide to keep edges with γ>0.2 only, then we are
left with a single tree in the list (the major tree).
This is because our example has 1 hybrid node with minor γ=0.196.
```@repl dist_reroot
t = displayedTrees(net1, 0.2)
```

We can also delete all "non-important" reticulations,
those with a minor heritability γ below some threshold.
The function below changes our network `net1`,
as indicated by its name ending with a `!`.

```@repl dist_reroot
deleteHybridThreshold!(net1, 0.1)
```
Nothing happened to our network: because its γ is above 0.1.
But if we set the threshold to 0.3, then our reticulation disappears:
```@repl dist_reroot
deleteHybridThreshold!(net1, 0.3)
```
See also function `displayedNetworkAt!` to get the network with
a single reticulation of interest, and eliminate all other
reticulations.

Commit message:

dist_reroot manual page: start

docs/src/man/dist_reroot.md, after:

```@setup dist_reroot
using PhyloNetworks
mkpath("../assets/figures")
```
# Comparing and manipulating networks

Examples below use networks available from the package.
We can load them as follows.
`astraltree` is a tree estimated using ASTRAL,
`net0` is a network estimated using SNaQ under the constraint of 0 reticulation,
so it's also a tree, and
`net1` is a network estimated under the constraint of 1 reticulation, so not a tree.

All of them are to be interpreted as *semidirected* networks,
because their root is not identifiable by the method used to estimate them.
This affects how we want them.

```@example dist_reroot
astralfile = joinpath(dirname(pathof(PhyloNetworks)), "..","examples","astral.tre")
astraltree = readMultiTopology(astralfile)[102] # 102th tree = last tree here
net0 = readTopology(joinpath(dirname(pathof(PhyloNetworks)), "..","examples","net0.out"))
net1 = readTopology(joinpath(dirname(pathof(PhyloNetworks)), "..","examples","net1.out"))
```

## Robinson-Foulds and hardwired-cluster distance

Do the 2 trees `astraltree` and `net0` have the same topology, unrooted?
We can calculate their Robinson-Foulds distance:

```@repl dist_reroot
hardwiredClusterDistance(astraltree, net0, false)
```
The last option `false` is to consider topologies as unrooted.
The RF distance is 0, so the two unrooted topologies are the same.
If we had considered them as rooted, with whatever root they
currently have in their internal representation,
we would find a difference:
```@repl dist_reroot
hardwiredClusterDistance(astraltree, net0, true)
```

## Re-rooting trees and networks

We can re-root our networks with the outgroup, O,
and then re-compare the ASTRAL tree and the SNaQ tree
as rooted topologies (and find no difference):
```@repl dist_reroot
rootatnode!(astraltree, "O")
rootatnode!(net0, "O")
hardwiredClusterDistance(astraltree, net0, true)
```
```@example dist_reroot
using PhyloPlots, RCall
R"name <- function(x) file.path('..', 'assets', 'figures', x)"
R"svg(name('net0_O.svg'), width=4, height=4)"
R"par"(mar=[0,0,0,0])
plot(net0);
R"dev.off()"
nothing # hide
```
![net0_O](../assets/figures/net0_O.svg)

Note that we use the possibilities of
[`RCall`](https://juliainterop.github.io/RCall.jl/stable/gettingstarted/)
to save the plot. We only show these commands once, but they will be run
behind the scene each time a plot is called.

After trees/networks are rooted with a correct outgroup,
their visualization is more meaningful.

Networks can be re-rooted at a given node or along a given edge.
Get help (type `?`) on the functions `rootatnode!` and `rootonedge!`
for more info. There are examples in the [Network support](@ref) section.

If the network is plotted with crossing edges, you may identify
ways to rotate the children edges at some nodes to untangle some crossing edges.
This can be done using the function `rotate!`.
See an example in the [Network support](@ref) section, or type `?` then `rotate!`.

## What if the root conflicts with the direction of a reticulation?

With 1 hybridization or more, the direction of hybrid edges
constrain the position of the root. The root cannot be downstream of hybrid edges.
Any hybrid node has to be younger than, or of the same age as both of its parents.
So time has to flow "downwards" of any hybrid node, and the root cannot be
placed "below" a hybrid node.
An attempt to re-root the network at a position incompatible with hybrid edges
will fail, with a `RootMismatch` error. To show an example, let's use the
network below. We plotted the edge numbers, because we will want to use them
later to place the root.

```@example dist_reroot
net7taxa = readTopology("(C,D,((O,(E,#H7:::0.196):0.314):0.664,(((A1,A2))#H7:::0.804,B):10.0):10.0);")
R"svg(name('reroot_net7taxa_1.svg'), width=4, height=4)" # hide
R"par"(mar=[0,0,0,0]) # hide
plot(net7taxa, showgamma=true, showedgenumber=true, tipoffset=0.2);
R"dev.off()"; # hide
nothing # hide
```
![reroot net7taxa 1](../assets/figures/reroot_net7taxa_1.svg)

Let's imagine that the A1 and A2 are our outgroups, and we estimated the network above.
According to this network, time must flow from the hybrid node towards A1 and A2.
So any attempt to reroot the network with A1 as outgroup, or with A2 as outgroup,
or with the A clade (on edge 11), will fail with a `RootMismatch` error:

```julia
rootatnode!(net7taxa, "A1"); # ERROR: RootMismatch: non-leaf node 5 had 0 children. ...
rootatnode!(net7taxa, "A2"); # ERROR: RootMismatch (again)
rootonedge!(net7taxa, 10);   # ERROR: RootMismatch (again)
```

In this case, however, it is possible to root the network on either parent edge
of the hybrid node. These edges have numbers 12 and 5, based on the plot above.
We get these 2 rooted versions of the network:

```@example dist_reroot
R"svg(name('reroot_net7taxa_2.svg'), width=7, height=4)"; # hide
R"layout(matrix(1:2,1,2))";
R"par"(mar=[0,0,0.5,0]); # hide
rootonedge!(net7taxa, 11);
rotate!(net7taxa, -5)
plot(net7taxa, showgamma=true, tipoffset=0.2, shownodenumber=true);
R"mtext"("rooted on hybrid edge 11 (major)", line=-1)
rootonedge!(net7taxa, 5);
plot(net7taxa, showgamma=true, tipoffset=0.2);
R"mtext"("rooted on hybrid edge 5 (minor)", line=-1);
R"dev.off()"; # hide
nothing # hide
```
![reroot net7taxa 2](../assets/figures/reroot_net7taxa_2.svg)

On the second plot, the A clade does not *appear* to be an outgroup,
but this is just because the plot follows the major tree primarily,
based the major hybrid edges (those with γ>0.5).
We can display the exact same network differently, by changing
the γ inheritance values to invert the major/minor consideration of the hybrid edges.
```@example dist_reroot
net7taxa.edge[5] # just to check that it's one of the 2 hybrid edges of interest
setGamma!(net7taxa.edge[5], 0.501) # switch major/minor edges
R"svg(name('reroot_net7taxa_3.svg'), width=4, height=4)"; # hide
R"layout(matrix(1,1,1))"; # hide
R"par"(mar=[0,0,0,0]); # hide
plot(net7taxa, tipoffset=0.2); # not showing gamma values, because we changed them artificially
R"mtext"("rooted on hybrid edge 5 (considered major)", line=-1);
R"dev.off()"; # hide
nothing # hide
```
![reroot net7taxa 3](../assets/figures/reroot_net7taxa_3.svg)

Conclusion, in this particular example: it is possible to re-root the network to a place
where the A clade is indeed an outgroup. But it did require some care,
and we discovered that there are 2 acceptable rooting options.
The first is more plausible, if we think that the *species tree* is the *major tree*,
meaning that any gene flow or introgression event replaced less than 50% of the genes
in the recipient population.

In other cases, it may not be possible to re-root the network with a known outgroup.
It would be the case if A1 was the only outgroup, and if A2 was an ingroup taxon.
In such a case, the outgroup knowledge tells us that our estimated network is wrong.
One (or more) reticulation in the network must be incorrect.
Its placement might be correct, but then its direction would be incorrect.
If the network was estimated via `snaq!`, check tips
about [Candidate networks compatible with a known outgroup](@ref).

## Extracting the major tree

We can also compare the networks estimated with h=0 (net0) and h=1 (net1):
```@repl dist_reroot
rootatnode!(net1, "O"); # the ; suppresses screen output
hardwiredClusterDistance(net0, net1, true)
```
```@example dist_reroot
R"svg(name('net1_O.svg'), width=4, height=4)" # hide
R"par"(mar=[0,0,0,0]) # hide
plot(net1, showgamma=true);
R"dev.off()" # hide
nothing # hide
```
![net1_O](../assets/figures/net1_O.svg)

They differ by 2 clusters: that's because A is of hybrid descent
in net1, not in net0.

To beyond this hybrid difference,
we can extract the major tree from the network with 1 hybridization,
that is, delete the hybrid edge supported by less than 50% of genes.
Then we can compare this tree with the ASTRAL/SNaQ tree net0.
```@repl dist_reroot
tree1 = majorTree(net1); # major tree from net1
hardwiredClusterDistance(net0, tree1, true)
```
They are identical (at distance 0), so here the species network
with 1 hybrid node is a refinement of the estimated species tree
(this needs not be the case always).

Is the SNaQ network with 1 hybrid node the same as the true network,
the one that was initially used to simulate the data?

(digression on the data: gene trees were simulated under the coalescent
along some "true" network, then 500 base-pair alignments were simulated
along each gene tree with the HKY model,
gene trees were estimated from each alignment with RAxML, and
these estimated gene trees served as input to both ASTRAL and SNaQ.)

The true network is shown below, correctly rooted at the outgroup O,
and plotted with branch lengths proportional to their
values in coalescence units:
```@repl dist_reroot
truenet = readTopology("((((D:0.4,C:0.4):4.8,((A:0.8,B:0.8):2.2)#H1:2.2::0.7):4.0,(#H1:0::0.3,E:3.0):6.2):2.0,O:11.2);");
hardwiredClusterDistance(net1, truenet, true)
```
```@example dist_reroot
R"svg(name('truenet_sim.svg'), width=4, height=4)" # hide
R"par"(mar=[0,0,0,0]) # hide
plot(truenet, useedgelength=true, showgamma=true);
R"dev.off()" # hide
nothing # hide
```
![truenet](../assets/figures/truenet_sim.svg)

Our estimated network is not the same as the true network:
- the underlying tree is correctly estimated
- the origin of gene flow is correctly estimated: E
- the target of gene flow is *not* correctly estimated: it was
  the lineage ancestral to (A,B), but it is estimated to be A only.

For networks, the distance here is the hardwired cluster distance:
the number of hardwired clusters found in one network and not
in the other. The **hardwired cluster** associated with an edge is the
set of *all* tips descendant from that edge, i.e. all tips that
inherited at least *some* genetic material from that edge.

## Displayed trees and subnetworks

We can extract all trees displayed in a network.
These trees are obtained by picking one parent hybrid edge
at each hybrid node, and dropping the other parent hybrid edge.
We can choose to pick the "important" hybrid edges only,
with heritability γ at or above a threshold.
Below we use a γ threshold of 0, so we get all displayed trees:
```@repl dist_reroot
t = displayedTrees(net1, 0.0) # list of trees displayed in network
writeTopology(t[1], round=true)
writeTopology(t[2], round=true)
```
If we decide to keep edges with γ>0.2 only, then we are
left with a single tree in the list (the major tree).
This is because our example has 1 hybrid node with minor γ=0.196.
```@repl dist_reroot
t = displayedTrees(net1, 0.2)
```

We can also delete all "non-important" reticulations,
those with a minor heritability γ below some threshold.
The function below changes our network `net1`,
as indicated by its name ending with a `!`.

```@repl dist_reroot
deleteHybridThreshold!(net1, 0.1)
```
Nothing happened to our network: because its γ is above 0.1.
But if we set the threshold to 0.3, then our reticulation disappears:
```@repl dist_reroot
deleteHybridThreshold!(net1, 0.3)
```
See also function `displayedNetworkAt!` to get the network with
a single reticulation of interest, and eliminate all other
reticulations.
